the 12th, testing, testing. Okay, am I speaking
here? I'm testing also, and got a frog in my voice it
sounds like, but I think I'll work through it. This
is March the 12th, and we're at 1709 Glade, and I
have the honor and joy of chatting with Robert
Spode, S-P-O-D-E. No, S-P-O-E-D-E. Oh,
S-P-O-E-D, oh, thank you, thank you. German
umlaut, old German umlaut. Oh. What does that mean
in German? Do you know? I have no idea. We're
searching and searching. Cannot find it. Quite
possibly has something to do with ashes from which
you make china, porcelain, and stuff like that. We
wonder if there's a relationship with Spode China
in England. And my grandfather's citizen papers
had SVO . To
introduce yourself to anyone who would read this
transcript or hear this tape, Tell us about your
family background. Give us a brief biographical
sketch of you until you came to A&M. Where'd you
grow up and family and so forth? I was born in a farm
out in the midst of the cotton patch in Austin
County near the hamlet or village of Wallace,
Texas. My parents at that time were sharecropping
farmers for their on land owned by their parents,
my father's parents, who were German. And they had
about four farms that they had. They shared the
produce and the crops on.
My family, my background and lineage is that of
German, basically peasant Germans who came over
here at 1880 as teenagers and met over here in the
vicinity of New York. One was my grandmother was
Catholic, my grandfather was Protestant,
Lutheran. They got married.
Many interesting things there, but they were
successful in a truck farm about where
Meadowlands football field is now. And my father
used to tell them, taking the truck with the
produce over to the markets in New York City. But
anyway, they sold that farm, came around by boat to
Galveston, in Austin County and bought land from
my mother's parents who had come into Texas about
1855 in
Wallace, Texas and established there. Then when I
was six years old, we moved across the Gracious
River from Austin County into Fort Bend County
where my father there was sharecropping land
owned by my mother's father. Now he had a much
larger holding. He had about 1400 acres and had
about 10 acres sharecroppers, 10, 11, 12
sharecroppers. Now, these were basically
Mexican sharecroppers. What was the money crop
then? Cotton. Cotton. You grew almost most of the
cotton, a little bit of corn. Then you grew
vegetables for your own use and cows and pigs and
stuff like that. And the railroad ran through that
area by then? The railroad went through there. In
fact, the town of Wallace, Hamlet, could well have
been named for my mother's family, Giler. because
they gave a good portion of the land of the town when
they built the railroad through there. And it
moved Beaubing Bend, Texas, which was on the
Brazos River, over into along the railroad. And
Beaubing Bend, of course, no longer exists. And it
was from there that my mother's father left home in
1878 by ox cart and driven. And there is an article.
way back about him, written by him on his trip to
A&M. It was written for the Texas Ivy publication.
It wasn't the magazine it is now. It was pulp paper.
And coming there with his black hooker to pop the
fly off of an ox, you know, with his whip and so on.
They went to Hockley and there he got on the train
and came to A&M on the train in 1878. Now with him, He
did not finish A&M because he got in a knife fight as
about a 14-year-old. He was about 14. It was a
three-year curriculum. A&M was then really kind
of a high school for him. And he got in a knife fight
and had to drop out of school. But he loved A&M all
the years of his life. Are you saying N-I-G-H-T,
knight, or K-N-I-F-E? Knife fight. A knife fight.
K-N-I-F-E. Yeah, with knives. With knives. Was
anybody hurt, or do you know? He was hurt. I don't
know who else was hurt. But he was a violent man. He
was a, I know he killed at least one man later on. Was
he, in today's terminology, did he have an
academic major? I don't know. He was, but he loved
history, loved learning. It demonstrated to me
and incited an interest in me because he named his
horses Saxon and, what was the other one? There's
another, one of the other Germanic tribes.
Mm-hmm. Not Engle, but Saxon and something else.
Vandals, Saxon and Vandals. So he was here almost
three years? No, about one year. Oh, one year. He
was here at the same time, probably the same.
Houston's son was here. And, of course, everybody
lived on the campus. Lived on the campus. Lived in
Gayford Hall at that time. But, in fact, he was a
high school student. Really a high school
student. He was born in April of 1865, and he
enrolled in, I guess, fall of 1878. So you figure
out he was about 13. Did you hear any stories about
how he got to college, got to the campus, and did he
always go by cart or wagon? I don't know how he got
back. No, I don't know. No, I didn't. Any family
souvenirs, keepsakes from him? I was the youngest
grandson. His son and his son's son were the first
three-generation family to come in here. None of
them graduated. I and my brother were the second
and third. Many of our family came in here who ever
graduated. So you're his grandson. I'm his
grandson. Okay, he goes back into farming. He goes
back into farming and he also had a general store
and his farming when I was in doctoral program they
talked about how did they keep the plantations
going and the way they described was exactly he had
a commissary in his backyard when I knew him and His
tenants would come in and buy on credit from the
commissary, and then when the cotton was sold,
they would settle their accounts and have
nothing. And his tenants were Hispanic, were
Mexican-American. Right, right, not black. And
then my father and my mother, but there's a lot of
story that he promised him 200 acres of land or
something, but he never came through with it. Now,
did your dad come to A&M? My dad never finished high
school. His father thought seventh grade
education was enough for any former. He was going
to be a former. And he never finished high school.
But he did marry my mother, who had gone to CIA,
College of Industrial Arts. It didn't later,
Texas State College of Women. Now, Texas Women's
University, Sister's School, A&M. And she had a
certificate. That was a three-year program, too,
when she went there. And she didn't have a
bachelor's, but she could teach school. And she
helped him a lot. And he, World War I, he was drafted
and won the Army and was selected for also Kennedy
School, because he could name the equivalent
ranks in the Navy to the Army. It was a big thing. And
got a commission. And during the 20s and 30s, he
went back to farming. And in the 20s and 30s, he kept
his commission active. And then in 1936, he was
called to the Army.
And we moved from Simonton, Texas, where I started
school two years, first and second grade in a
two-room schoolhouse, grades one to six there,
and moved to Lufkin. Then we moved to Waco, all
transferred by the CCC, then to Marshall, Texas,
then to Fort Worth, Texas, and that's where we
worked when Pearl Harbor started. And he was
called to active duty, I mean, with active army,
and went to San Antonio, where he was
pro-Marshall, of wartime San Antonio, 500,000,
and he had to keep order downtown San Antonio, and
with no, no police experience, no college degree.
But he did a good job, and he was chosen to be the
technical expert for a training field called town
patrolling. And he went to Hollywood. We can't
imagine my father in Hollywood. All right, so
you're in high school at Jefferson? I was in high
school at San Antonio, graduated in June the 3rd, I
think, 1944, Friday night. Sunday, we were at A&M.
My best friend and I came to A&M on that, and we came
in his parents' car, pre-war car, not big, and all
of our possessions were in the trunk of that car for
two of us. Maybe a little radio, I don't know. So you
enrolled in the summer school? We came and we were
enrolling on D-Day. Our class was very proud of the
fact that, and I was, with my interest in current
events, history, I was about to go crazy because I
could hear the radios talking about the invasion,
you know, and I had to stand in line. What
do you think was the attitude of your buddies and
everybody else about whether or not D-Day would
succeed? Were Americans optimistic? We assumed
it would. We were optimistic, for sure. Then never
dreamt it not succeeding. I mean, that was the
first time it ever crossed my mind. I'm looking
back, you know, that there was... My dad was...
woodworker in the shipyard in Orange. And we're
driving back to Garland to visit family. And I've
got the radio on the whole time. And that night, my
grandmother let me sleep on a pallet in the living
room. And I put the radio right near my pillow and
turned it and listened to it all night. And I
particularly remember some of the famous radio
voices giving live reports. Here comes a dive
bomber. Here comes a this. Here comes a that. Well,
I did that with Edward R. Murrow, a reporter from
London, in describing the fight that won the Fair
Plains, you know. Let's back up. When did you get
the encouragement to go to college? How early did
you, now in hindsight, realize that you were
destined to go to college?
at the earliest possible time, when you even begin
to think about that, it was a given from, I guess,
from my mother. My father also, he wanted to go to
A&M. If he could have gone to school, and he loved
the school, and the juncture of being a reserve
officer and forming, coming together in the Corps
of Cadets, and marrying the daughter of a person
who loved this school dearly, and who, in fact, has
the oldest foundation, and the former students
is, I think, Hibbs. And his name's not very big, you
know, about $2,000. But I think it's the oldest one
there. But he loved this school. They all did. All
right. When you came to enroll that summer, what
did you bring physically? What stuff did you have?
Some underwear, some civilian clothes, not much.
Maybe
two days of clothing at the most, three days, I
mean. You said maybe a radio. Maybe a radio. Any
other? Well, I wasn't shaving yet, so I didn't have
to bring any razor or anything. Probably, I guess I
brought a toothbrush. Not much. I mean, not very
much. Do you remember your parents or anyone else
giving you any last-minute advice, counsel? No. I
was a very compliant boy. Very obedient. That
never gave them any trouble. I get very much a
family thing here. I'd seen my mother cry an awful
lot from phone calls. And I was the youngest of
three boys. And I never wanted her to get a phone
call from me or about me that made her cry. I've had
enough of that. And so, if she told me to be in at 10
o'clock, I was in at 10 o'clock. Not only she
didn't, she wasn't that restrictive, if you don't
understand me, but I was very compliant. I've
always been very compliant. Therefore, I had no
trouble at A&M as a patient. Why did you come to
summer school instead of waiting for the fall?
Well, when I finished high school, my brother had
been lost as a Marine Corps fighter pilot off
Guadalcanal. And
I wanted to join the Marines. So my folks, I wanted
to join the Marines as soon as I graduated. My
mother, having lost one son, asked me, she said,
Robert, would you please get one semester of
college in? And at that time, me and Amber ran three
semesters in one year. And... I said, all right.
They said, you can get a summer semester in before
you turn 18. I did not want to sign up for the draft. I
was super patriotic, I think. And to sign up for the
draft meant I was going reluctantly. And I did not
want that on my record, so I never wanted to be
eligible for the draft. So I wanted to sign up when I
was 17. And they lived up to theirs. I lived up to
mine. And I went down to San Antonio and signed up.
And when I got through, the officer there said,
recommend you go back to college because we've got
55 people ahead of you. And we think you can never
get another semester in. And so I went back to
college as a Marine Corps private reserve. and got
all but two weeks of the fall semester, and the
college gave me credit for the semester. All
right, back to that summer.
Was it pretty well a full semester in terms of the
number of students? Was it a big number? We have a
very small class. I'm class co-agent of my class
now, and it's the most we ever had in the class, and
that's counting some that came in in August and
September. kind of son who came in immediately at
the war and went through real quickly and
graduated in 48 and some transfer to graduate in 48
and the total class at the biggest was 900 the total
number of the class alright describe y'all you
came with this friend and y'all drive up where did
you go to to kind of report we got a letter Parents
got a letter, bring your darling, I mean, I'm
paraphrasing, putting some other words in there,
bring your darling little boy to campus, open the
car doors, put his baggage out, put him on the curb,
kiss him goodbye, get back in your car, and leave
him in our tender mercies. And Mr. and Mrs. Lane did
that. and we were left standing there, and we knew
where our dorm was, which was Walton Hall, and we
wandered over there, I guess, and immediately we
were in the tender mercies of the sophomores and
juniors. But I came to A&M with my best friend,
which was a big asset, because there was a little
touch of home there, and it made it easier. Had you
visited the campus before that? Oh, yes. Sorry.
Well, yes. First time I visited campus, 1936, my
father brought me over from Lufkin, Texas to a
football game in which Dick Todd was a sophomore
for A&M and playing against Sammy Ball, who was a
senior at TCU. A&M won that game, but next year got
clobbered real bad. No, two years later got
clobbered real bad, but that was the first time.
Then my brother came. his freshman year, and he
lived in the corner ramp of Puryear Hall, no longer
existing. And we drove up and parked there on that
street that was in front of Puryear Hall. And I went
in, and all of these people started introducing
themselves to me. I was a 12-year-old. I'm Fish
so-and-so. I'm Fish Gillis. My brother's
roommate was Tom Gillis. And I'm Fish Gillis. I'm
Fish so-and-so. And I went back out of the car and
said, Mom, what kind of place is this? Everybody
here is named Fish. But that was 1938. But I was
taken in, and I go to football games with my
brother, Stan, with the Corps of Cadets, and Saul
washed his hands off, and I got totally,
completely brainwashed. And this is what I
wanted, to be part of the brotherhood.
fellowship.
So you arrived that summer. You already knew what
dorm you were going to be. Describe how you and this
friend, how did you all get blended into that dorm
and into that outfit? What outfit were you in? I was
in A battery field artillery. The battery
commander was named Builderback. There were two
Builderbacks. One was the track man. This was not
the track man. He was the veterinarian student,
and the executive officer of the battery was Mr.
Spear. We had a fellow from down in Duval County
named Parr, which we had a nickname for. I better
not use it here, but it has to do with a part of the
sexual and alliteration organs. But he was a
sophomore, and he was a kind of a mean one. The later
I called on our battery commander, who's now a
veterinarian, but he's paraplegic. And I went to
San Antonio to see if we bought him one time, and
looked him up. And I asked him, I said, how did we end
up at being your room art lease? He said, I've
selected you as your roommate. And so we were his
room art lease, which was a big, big, big asset. I
mean, Mr. Park came to us and told us to do
something. Sorry, sir, I'm on detail from Mr.
Builder back. And he was a kind of a protector,
being room orderly to him. I like to talk about room
orderly business sometimes. I do. And it was,
several things happened. Number one, we were
there. I like to talk, why did I come to A&M? I came to
A&M as I guess an anthropologist would call it a
rite of passage. to see if I could take it. I knew
what A&M was. My brothers had been here. I knew
about the hazing. I wanted the hazing. I wanted it.
I wanted that year. Just test my mettle. I
figured that doing it remotely for one year and
getting it for three years was a pretty good deal.
But there were things that happened. My father
broke a relationship with a man. Maybe you don't
want to use the name because he's a local fellow
here. He probably has relatives here, but I will
name him. You can cut it out later if you want to.
Captain Joe Falk was a tech officer here. Joe Falk
was a friend of my father's from CCC days. And he
came to my father and says, Herman, get Robert to
tell you what's going on in the outfit, and we'll
get rid of those upperclassmen who were having to
perform with Marguerite. My father never spoke to
him again in his life. And they called Captain Hank
up. hiding. A freshman lifted the lid of a garbage
can. There was a captain in there trying to find
him. It just was ridiculous. Most of us were
getting a little fine and didn't want to do it. I'll
go back. I'm talking here. They gave us that letter
and told us to leave. Everybody did that except one
set of parents. I'll name his name. His name was
Fish Helbig. He ended up in my outfit. And his
parents stood in line, all these long lines, to
register and get, you know, do all of that, and
stood out like a sore thumb, because there were
other parents that just dropped us off and gone
home. Well, Fish Hellwick was in and out, but he got
hazed a lot more than I did, because, as I said, I'm a
good, compliant boy, and I had nobody. But he got
hazed, and he wrote along and told his parents
about it, how they were getting him up and doing
everything, and do sit-ups and push-ups and so
forth at 2 o'clock in the morning, And his mother
sent a letter to some administrator at A&M. And
then all of a sudden we had a big battery meeting.
And so and so and so and so and so and so had been
dismissed from the Corps and had to be day dodgers
now. And it was a real, real cold. I mean, it was the
first time I'd ever been in a meeting like that.
Very somber. Now, did those activities that today
we'd call hazing, did that begin almost
immediately? Immediately. Immediately. How
long was it before classes began? After you
arrived? Very quickly. During the summer, since
this was three semesters year-round, was that
summer semester Monday, Wednesday, Friday,
Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday classes? Yes, it was
when I came back. Until 49. About how many hours did
you take that first semester? I think I took 17
hours. And what was your major at that time? At that
time, it was civil engineering. Go back. Why did
you pick that? When I finished high school, if you
had asked me, what is your ambition? And if I'd been
honest, though most high school students, it's
harder than being absolutely honest. I always
said my ambition is to be a Texas Aggie. My
immediate ambition is to be a Texas Aggie. Well, to
go to A&M,
I knew with my interest and aptitude that I should
go to that school 90 miles west of here. I knew I
loved words, I loved reading, I loved literature,
I loved history, but I'd rather have been dead than
go to that school. So I wanted to be a Texas Aggie.
And if you go to A&M, well, you should. really ought
to major something he was fairly good at,
engineering, agriculture, something like that.
Which, okay, which is the broadest of the
engineering? Civil engineering. So I'll go and
major in civil engineering. And I got here and pick
up my, all my books and I get my history book and read
it, all of it, all the way through the first two
books. About a minute later I said, this is
ridiculous. I can do this engineering, but yuck. I
don't like it. Not interesting. You spend too much
time in labs for the credits you get. I mean, I go
three hours to history class and English class and
get three hours of credit. I go to three hours of
chemistry and then four hours of lab and get four
hours of credit. That's a bump, you know. But I like
the history, so I said, I don't care if any of them is
good in history or not good in history. I'm going to
major in history. And what did you think you were
going to do with that history degree? At the first,
I thought I probably would have to teach history.
And then, while I was here, it came back from the
Marines, one or much other. Now, go back to about
fourth grade, when I was in Texas one time, I
remember these things. A teacher came in and said,
what's your ambition? My father, whom I loved and
admired, was a wonderful man, was a captain of the
reserves, but I could tell around the table he
could be relieved from active duty at any time, and
we were back on the farm. We had nothing. And by
their conversation, I knew that they really
envied the people who had the security of a regular
Army commission. And so I wanted to be like him, a
captain, but I wanted to be a captain, one step up, a
regular Army. I said, I want to be a captain of the
regular army. She really got on me. She said, why do
you want to be such a bum? I mean, she really rented
out. She had cancer somewhere or something, a
piece of it. And she said that. So one of my things
was captain of the regular army. I dreamt of having
a regular army commission. The only other school I
thought about at the first point, even remotely.
That first semester, did you have some, do you
remember some of the teachers, courses, et cetera
you had that first semester? Were some of those
important to you in the long run that you now
realize? Only Dr. Chemistry later present me and
him. Harrington? Harrington. He was a wonderful
friend of the cadets. Describe him as a teacher.
Just, to me, just easygoing and understanding and
fun. But one thing I do remember that We sat in that
chemistry building, and I did not know that I was
nearsighted. And they set us by alphabetical
order. And I ended up at the back of the chemistry
building, of the chemistry lecture room. And I
could not see what he was writing on the
blackboard. And I never did learn to do balance
equations in chemistry. But I managed to get by
with a C somehow. But let me see.
Later on, when I came back, I remember them much
better. But I don't remember that. In fact, my
mind, since I was going and going to Marines, my
freshman grades don't show very good at all. But
you passed everything. I passed everything. In
fact, my weapon of great point went down from high
school, as did all the Thomas Jefferson people. My
grade points... One up, rather, from what we've
done in high school. And Jefferson was a great high
school at that time. Absolutely fabulous. About
how many in your senior class? At Jefferson, 555
graduated. 555. Yeah. And they had two
graduations a year. Describe, beginning that
summer, describe a typical class day for an Aggie
Fish in the summer of 44, is that right? Summer of
44. What time did y'all get up? What did you do when?
Get up around, I assume, six o'clock. Clean up our
room.
We're done cleaning up the upper-classes room at
that time. Fall out for formation. And you'd fall
out where? It depends on which dorm we were in. If we
were in what we called the new area, the first time
we'd fall out in front of Walton Hall and march to
Sevesa.
Then we'd eat and table service. A lot of guys were
working their way through A&M simply by waiting on
tables in the dining halls and get through. and
give all the good stuff, meal service to the
upperclassmen. They got first, pretty much first
pick. And use all this language and learn that
stuff. And
I don't remember eating at a brace that we may have,
but I don't remember doing it. And
going back and cleaning up, making sure our room
was spotless, and the upperclassmen room was
spotless, Mr. Bailback, Mr. Spears room was
spotless. empty their garbage and all that good
stuff. Then at 8 o'clock, go to our first class.
Then about 9 o'clock, generally speaking in the
morning, go across the railroad tracks. We had PE
three times a week.
It was more like basic training. As I said in a,
talking to kids from Muster when we had our 50th
anniversary class, I said in one quarter basic
training in three quarters academic
institution. There was survival at sea and PE when
your ship, not if your ship got sunk, but when your
ship got sunk. How to make a flotation device out of
your trousers. Mr. Art Adamson did that. Then we'd
go over to the Tender Mercies of Mr. Penberthy and
Mr. Putnam. And that was the other time.